README.md, before:

# PhyMuT: A Physics-Aware, Multi-Modal Time-Series Model for Strawberry Yield Forecasting


This repository contains the code for the PhyMuT strawberry yield forecasting
pipeline used in the paper. It includes:

- Multi-season yield forecasting models (sequence-based predictors)
- Weather embedding training for auxiliary features
- Data diagnostics and analysis scripts

Raw image data and processed data tables are not included. Please request data
access from the authors as described in `data/README.md`.

## Project layout

- `src/phymut/`: core library code
  - `forecasting/`: models, training, and evaluation
  - `analysis/`: dataset diagnostics and weather embedding training
- `scripts/`: runnable entry points
- `data/`: (not included) datasets and weather embeddings
- `outputs/`: generated results and plots
- `archive/`: legacy outputs and experiments (local only, ignored by git)

## Data expectations

After access is granted, arrange files like this:

```
data/
  2324_GNV_processed/
    240123/
      consolidated_summary_with_yield.csv
      ...
    counting_yield/
      240123.csv
      ...
    2324_weather.csv
  2425_GNV_processed/
    ...
  weather_allout/
    2324/
      embed.npy
      model.pth
    2425/
      embed.npy
      model.pth
```

The `weather_allout/` directory can be generated with the weather embedding
script if it is not provided.

## Setup

Recommended environment:

- Python 3.10+
- PyTorch
- numpy, pandas, scikit-learn, matplotlib, adjustText

Example install (CPU-only):

```
pip install torch numpy pandas scikit-learn matplotlib adjustText
```

## Running experiments

All entry points live in `scripts/` and manage paths automatically.

Forecasting (single-process):

```
python scripts/run_yield_forecast.py
```

Forecasting (multi-model parallel runs):

```
python scripts/run_parallel_models.py
```

Data diagnostics (plots and summary tables):

```
python scripts/data_analysis.py
```

Interpretability (lagged correlations + permutation importance):

```
PYTHONPATH=src python scripts/interpretability_analysis.py
```

Weather embedding training:

```
python scripts/weather_auto_regression.py
```

## Outputs

All generated artifacts are written under `outputs/`:

- `outputs/forecasting/results/`: prediction plots and metrics
- `outputs/forecasting/logs/`: parallel run logs
- `outputs/analysis_plots/`: diagnostic plots and CSV summaries
- `outputs/interpretability/`: lagged correlation plots, permutation importance plots,
  and CSV summaries for interpretability

## Interpretability details

The interpretability script runs two complementary analyses:

1) Lagged correlation analysis
   - Computes Pearson correlations between each feature at week `t` and yield at
     week `t+h`, for each forecast horizon `h`.
   - Uses the same feature set as the forecasting model: phenology counts
     (`strawberry_flower`, `strawberry_green`, `strawberry_white`,
     `strawberry_pink`), canopy metrics (`Area`, `Volume`), and 8 PCA components
     of the weather embedding (`weather_pc1..8`).
   - Produces per-season heatmaps and a CSV table:
     `outputs/interpretability/lagged_corr_2324.png`,
     `outputs/interpretability/lagged_corr_2425.png`,
     `outputs/interpretability/lagged_correlations.csv`.

2) Permutation importance (model attribution)
   - Trains a lightweight LSTM on the same inputs as the main pipeline and then
     permutes one feature at a time across plots (preserving the time axis).
   - Reports the RMSE delta per horizon and overall, capturing how much each
     feature degrades forecast performance when shuffled.
   - Outputs:
     `outputs/interpretability/perm_importance_2324_seq4.png`,
     `outputs/interpretability/perm_importance_2425_seq4.png`,
     `outputs/interpretability/permutation_importance.csv`,
     `outputs/interpretability/permutation_importance_topk.csv`.

### Configuration (edit `scripts/interpretability_analysis.py`)

- `input_rows`: feature list used for phenology/canopy inputs.
- `horizons_by_season`: correlation horizons to evaluate.
- `seq_len_by_season`: training sequence length (used to derive forecast length).
- `model_name`, `hid_dim`, `num_layers`, `lr`, `num_epochs`: attribution model
  hyperparameters.

## Notes for reproducibility

- The code expects the dated subfolders to be named as `YYMMDD`.
- Ground-truth CSVs are loaded from `counting_yield/` inside each season.
- Weather embeddings are loaded from `data/weather_allout/<season>/embed.npy`.

## Citation

If you use this code, please cite the corresponding paper.

Commit message:

Fix interpretability labeling and horizons

README.md, after:

# PhyMuT: A Physics-Aware, Multi-Modal Time-Series Model for Strawberry Yield Forecasting


This repository contains the code for the PhyMuT strawberry yield forecasting
pipeline used in the paper. It includes:

- Multi-season yield forecasting models (sequence-based predictors)
- Weather embedding training for auxiliary features
- Data diagnostics and analysis scripts

Raw image data and processed data tables are not included. Please request data
access from the authors as described in `data/README.md`.

## Project layout

- `src/phymut/`: core library code
  - `forecasting/`: models, training, and evaluation
  - `analysis/`: dataset diagnostics and weather embedding training
- `scripts/`: runnable entry points
- `data/`: (not included) datasets and weather embeddings
- `outputs/`: generated results and plots
- `archive/`: legacy outputs and experiments (local only, ignored by git)

## Data expectations

After access is granted, arrange files like this:

```
data/
  2324_GNV_processed/
    240123/
      consolidated_summary_with_yield.csv
      ...
    counting_yield/
      240123.csv
      ...
    2324_weather.csv
  2425_GNV_processed/
    ...
  weather_allout/
    2324/
      embed.npy
      model.pth
    2425/
      embed.npy
      model.pth
```

The `weather_allout/` directory can be generated with the weather embedding
script if it is not provided.

## Setup

Recommended environment:

- Python 3.10+
- PyTorch
- numpy, pandas, scikit-learn, matplotlib, adjustText

Example install (CPU-only):

```
pip install torch numpy pandas scikit-learn matplotlib adjustText
```

## Running experiments

All entry points live in `scripts/` and manage paths automatically.

Forecasting (single-process):

```
python scripts/run_yield_forecast.py
```

Forecasting (multi-model parallel runs):

```
python scripts/run_parallel_models.py
```

Data diagnostics (plots and summary tables):

```
python scripts/data_analysis.py
```

Interpretability (lagged correlations + permutation importance):

```
PYTHONPATH=src python scripts/interpretability_analysis.py
```

Weather embedding training:

```
python scripts/weather_auto_regression.py
```

## Outputs

All generated artifacts are written under `outputs/`:

- `outputs/forecasting/results/`: prediction plots and metrics
- `outputs/forecasting/logs/`: parallel run logs
- `outputs/analysis_plots/`: diagnostic plots and CSV summaries
- `outputs/interpretability/`: lagged correlation plots, permutation importance plots,
  and CSV summaries for interpretability

## Interpretability details

The interpretability script runs two complementary analyses:

1) Lagged correlation analysis
   - Computes Pearson correlations between each feature at week `t` and yield at
     week `t+h`, for each forecast horizon `h`.
   - Uses the same feature set as the forecasting model: phenology counts
     (`strawberry_flower`, `strawberry_green`, `strawberry_white`,
     `strawberry_pink`), canopy metrics (`Area`, `Volume`), and 8 PCA components
     of the weather embedding (`weather_pc1..8`).
   - Produces per-season heatmaps and a CSV table:
     `outputs/interpretability/lagged_corr_2324.png`,
     `outputs/interpretability/lagged_corr_2425.png`,
     `outputs/interpretability/lagged_correlations.csv`.

2) Permutation importance (model attribution)
   - Trains a lightweight LSTM on the same inputs as the main pipeline and then
     permutes one feature at a time across plots (preserving the time axis).
   - Reports the RMSE delta per horizon and overall, capturing how much each
     feature degrades forecast performance when shuffled.
   - Outputs:
     `outputs/interpretability/perm_importance_2324_seq4.png`,
     `outputs/interpretability/perm_importance_2425_seq4.png`,
     `outputs/interpretability/permutation_importance.csv`,
     `outputs/interpretability/permutation_importance_topk.csv`.

### Configuration (edit `scripts/interpretability_analysis.py`)

- `input_rows`: feature list used for phenology/canopy inputs.
- `horizons_by_season`: correlation horizons to evaluate.
- `seq_len_by_season`: training sequence length.
- `forecast_len_by_season`: derived from `horizons_by_season`.
- `model_name`, `hid_dim`, `num_layers`, `lr`, `num_epochs`: attribution model
  hyperparameters.
- `feature_label_map` and `feature_label_order`: enforce consistent feature names
  and ordering (F, G, W, P, Area, Volume, weather_0..weather_7).

## Notes for reproducibility

- The code expects the dated subfolders to be named as `YYMMDD`.
- Ground-truth CSVs are loaded from `counting_yield/` inside each season.
- Weather embeddings are loaded from `data/weather_allout/<season>/embed.npy`.

## Citation

If you use this code, please cite the corresponding paper.
